README.md, before:

# DevOpsLab

This lab will step through the key elements in setting up a DevOps pipeline for Azure using the DevOps tools for Azure - Visual Studio Team Services (VSTS).

This lab is intended to provide a learning path through the [many existing VSTS labs](https://almvm.azurewebsites.net/), in order to focus on the core DevOps elements.

[What is DevOps?](https://www.visualstudio.com/learn/what-is-devops/)

[How Microsoft does DevOps](https://www.visualstudio.com/learn/devops-at-microsoft/)

# Overall flow

- Setup
- Working with Git
- Continuous Integration
- Create an Azure web app
- Continuous Deployment
- Automated Testing with Selenium
- Monitoring with Application Insights

# Preparing for the lab

For this lab you will require:

- A Visual Studio Team Services account (free)
- An Azure subscription (your own or a free trial)
- Visual Studio 2017 installed (optional)

1. Follow  [these instructions (overview section)](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/) to set the above up.
2. Use the [VSTS Demo Generator](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/VSTSDemoGenerator/) to create a VSTS project using the My Health Clinic template. Call the project My Health Clinic or something similar.

>Optional: Create a new Dashboard in VSTS:
>- In your VSTS project, select Dashboard and then New:
><img src="images/1.png" width="624"/>

>- Name the new Dashboard Lab Progress:
><img src="images/2.png" width="624"/>

>- Select the pencil icon in the bottom left, followed by the plus button:
><img src="images/3.png" width="624"/>

>- Search for and select the Markdown widget:
><img src="images/4.png" width="624"/>

>- Configure the Markdown widget and add the names of your team and any other summary info that might be useful:
><img src="images/5.png" width="624"/>

- Save the changes, close the widget gallery and save the dashboard by clicking on the blue edit button in the bottom right hand corner.


# Lab 1: Working with Git

[This lab](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/) will introduce you to using Git in VSTS for source control. 

1. Complete [Exercise 1: Cloning a Git repository](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-1-cloning-an-existing-repository) to ensure that you have the project cloned to Visual Studio.
2. If you are new to Git then complete [Exercise 2: Save work with commits](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-2-save-work-with-commits). 
3. Optionally complete:
- [Exercise 3: Review History](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-3-review-history)
- [Exercise 4: Manage Branches from Visual Studio](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-4-manage-branches-from-visual-studio)
- [Exercise 5: Manage branches from the Team Services Portal](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-5-manage-branches-from-the-team-services-portal)
- [Exercise 6: Pull Requests](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-6-pull-requests)
- [Exercise 7: Manage Repositories](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-7-manage-repositories). 
>Optional: Add a Code Tile to your Lab Progress dashboard:
>- Add the Code Tile:
><img src="images/6.png" width="624"/>

>- Configure the tile and make sure that the branch is master:
><img src="images/7.png" width="624"/>

>- Save the changes, close the widget gallery and save the dashboard by clicking on the blue edit button in the bottom right hand corner.

# Lab 2: Continuous Integration

Continuous Integration is a key DevOps practice to build, test and create the software to later deploy.

1. Complete the [Continuous Integration Lab](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/continuousintegration/).
>Optional: Add a Build History widget to the Lab Progress dashboard by:
>- Searching for and adding the build history widget:
><img src="images/8.png" width="624"/>

>- Ensuring that it is configured to the build definition created in the preceding steps:
<img src="images/9.png" width="624"/>

>- Save the changes, close the widget gallery and save the dashboard by clicking on the blue edit button in the bottom right hand corner.

# Lab 3: Create an Azure Web App

[Azure Web Apps](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/azure/app-service/app-service-web-overview) is an Azure service for hosting web applications. In this lab you'll create the Azure Web App into which you will later deploy the web application.

1. In a browser go to the Azure Portal at http://portal.azure.com.

2. Select Create a resource and enter web app into the search field:
<img src="images/WA-1.png" width="624"/>

3. Press enter and select Web App from the list:
<img src="images/WA-2.png" width="624"/>

4. Click Create:
<img src="images/WA-3.png" width="624"/>

5. Complete the highlighted fields as follows:
<img src="images/WA-4.png" width="800"/>

- App name: Choose a unique name that will be the URL for the web application such as Health plus your initials

- Subscription: If you have more than one subscription, ensure that you choose the correct one for this lab

- Resource Group: Create a new resource group for your web app

- OS: Leave this as the default of Windows.

- App Service Plan/Location: Click on this to create a new App Service Plan. Complete these fields:
    - App Service plan: Enter a name, such as HealthPlan
    - Location: Select an Azure region close to you
    - Pricing tier: Click on this, and select the F1 Free tier
6. Click OK to save the App Service Plan.

7. Click Create to save and create the Web App.

8. After a short time (perhaps 1-2 mins) you should see notification that the Web App has been successfully created. You may want to pin the web app to your Azure dashboard for easy location later on:
<img src="images/WA-5.png" width="624"/>

9. Confirm that your Web App is created by selecting Go to resource.

10. Click on the URL:
<img src="images/WA-6.png" width="624"/>

11. Your Web App should open in the browser and you will see something like this:
<img src="images/WA-7.png" width="624"/>

The exact page details will change over time but this now confirms that you have created a Web App in Azure. In the next lab we will deploy the web application into the newly created Web App.

>Optional: Add an Embedded Webpage widget to the Lab Progress dashboard by:
>- Searching for and adding the Embedded Webpage widget:
><img src="images/WA-8.png" width="624"/>

>- Add the URL for your web app created in the preceding steps:
><img src="images/WA-9.png" width="624"/>

>- Save the changes, close the widget gallery and save the dashboard by clicking on the blue edit button in the bottom right hand corner.

# Lab 4: Continuous Deployment

Continuous Deployment is another key practice within DevOps to enable to continuous delivery of value (in this example the web application) to end users.

1. Complete the following [Continuous Deployment Lab](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/continuousdeployment/) exercises:

- [Exercise 1 (all)](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/continuousdeployment/#exercise-1-connect-to-microsoft-azure)

- [Exercise 2 (all)](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/continuousdeployment/#exercise-2-creating-release-definitions)

>Note: There is no need to complete Exercise 2 Steps 9 and 10 (replace the database connection string and ConnectionStrings variable plus Azure SQL database creation). The web application can create it's own local database.

- [Exercise 3, Task 1 only](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/continuousdeployment/#task-1-triggers)

2. Confirm that the continuous deployment pipeline is working:

- Make a code change in Visual Studio (such as adding a comment or a minor UI change),  committing and pushing the change.

- Check the Continuous Integration build gets triggered.

- Once complete the Continuous Deployment should be triggered to deploy the changes into Azure.

>Optional: Add a Release Definition Overview widget to the Lab Progress dashboard by:
>- Searching for and adding the Release Definition Overview widget:
><img src="images/CD-1.png" width="300"/>

>- Set the Release Definition to the release created in the lab above:
><img src="images/CD-2.png" width="624"/>

>- Save the changes, close the widget gallery and save the dashboard by clicking on the blue edit button in the bottom right hand corner.

# Lab 5: Automated Testing with Selenium

To Do

[Automated Testing with Selenium](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/selenium/)

# Lab 6: Monitoring with Application Insights

To Do

[Monitoring with Application Insights](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/monitor/)

Other labs (To Do)

ARM

# Other labs 

If you'd like to continue exploring DevOps with VSTS then related labs include:

[Node.js and Express continuous deployment with Visual Studio Team Services and Azure App Service](https://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/nodejs/express/)

[DevOps with Visual Studio Team Services for Java](https://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/java/)

Commit message:

Draft outline of remaining labs

README.md, after:

# DevOpsLab

This lab will step through the key elements in setting up a DevOps pipeline for Azure using the DevOps tools for Azure - Visual Studio Team Services (VSTS).

This lab is intended to provide a learning path through the [many existing VSTS labs](https://almvm.azurewebsites.net/), in order to focus on the core DevOps elements.

[What is DevOps?](https://www.visualstudio.com/learn/what-is-devops/)

[How Microsoft does DevOps](https://www.visualstudio.com/learn/devops-at-microsoft/)

# Overall flow

- Setup
- Working with Git
- Continuous Integration
- Create an Azure web app
- Continuous Deployment
- Automated Testing with Selenium
- Monitoring with Application Insights

# Preparing for the lab

For this lab you will require:

- A Visual Studio Team Services account (free)
- An Azure subscription (your own or a free trial)
- Visual Studio 2017 installed (optional)

1. Follow  [these instructions (overview section)](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/) to set the above up.
2. Use the [VSTS Demo Generator](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/VSTSDemoGenerator/) to create a VSTS project using the My Health Clinic template. Call the project My Health Clinic or something similar.

>Optional: Create a new Dashboard in VSTS:
>- In your VSTS project, select Dashboard and then New:
><img src="images/1.png" width="624"/>

>- Name the new Dashboard Lab Progress:
><img src="images/2.png" width="624"/>

>- Select the pencil icon in the bottom left, followed by the plus button:
><img src="images/3.png" width="624"/>

>- Search for and select the Markdown widget:
><img src="images/4.png" width="624"/>

>- Configure the Markdown widget and add the names of your team and any other summary info that might be useful:
><img src="images/5.png" width="624"/>

- Save the changes, close the widget gallery and save the dashboard by clicking on the blue edit button in the bottom right hand corner.


# Lab 1: Working with Git

[This lab](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/) will introduce you to using Git in VSTS for source control. 

1. Complete [Exercise 1: Cloning a Git repository](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-1-cloning-an-existing-repository) to ensure that you have the project cloned to Visual Studio.
2. If you are new to Git then complete [Exercise 2: Save work with commits](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-2-save-work-with-commits). 
3. Optionally complete:
- [Exercise 3: Review History](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-3-review-history)
- [Exercise 4: Manage Branches from Visual Studio](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-4-manage-branches-from-visual-studio)
- [Exercise 5: Manage branches from the Team Services Portal](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-5-manage-branches-from-the-team-services-portal)
- [Exercise 6: Pull Requests](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-6-pull-requests)
- [Exercise 7: Manage Repositories](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/git/#exercise-7-manage-repositories). 
>Optional: Add a Code Tile to your Lab Progress dashboard:
>- Add the Code Tile:
><img src="images/6.png" width="624"/>

>- Configure the tile and make sure that the branch is master:
><img src="images/7.png" width="624"/>

>- Save the changes, close the widget gallery and save the dashboard by clicking on the blue edit button in the bottom right hand corner.

# Lab 2: Continuous Integration

Continuous Integration is a key DevOps practice to build, test and create the software to later deploy.

1. Complete the [Continuous Integration Lab](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/continuousintegration/).
>Optional: Add a Build History widget to the Lab Progress dashboard by:
>- Searching for and adding the build history widget:
><img src="images/8.png" width="624"/>

>- Ensuring that it is configured to the build definition created in the preceding steps:
<img src="images/9.png" width="624"/>

>- Save the changes, close the widget gallery and save the dashboard by clicking on the blue edit button in the bottom right hand corner.

# Lab 3: Create an Azure Web App

[Azure Web Apps](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-gb/azure/app-service/app-service-web-overview) is an Azure service for hosting web applications. In this lab you'll create the Azure Web App into which you will later deploy the web application.

1. In a browser go to the Azure Portal at http://portal.azure.com.

2. Select Create a resource and enter web app into the search field:
<img src="images/WA-1.png" width="624"/>

3. Press enter and select Web App from the list:
<img src="images/WA-2.png" width="624"/>

4. Click Create:
<img src="images/WA-3.png" width="624"/>

5. Complete the highlighted fields as follows:
<img src="images/WA-4.png" width="800"/>

- App name: Choose a unique name that will be the URL for the web application such as Health plus your initials

- Subscription: If you have more than one subscription, ensure that you choose the correct one for this lab

- Resource Group: Create a new resource group for your web app

- OS: Leave this as the default of Windows.

- App Service Plan/Location: Click on this to create a new App Service Plan. Complete these fields:
    - App Service plan: Enter a name, such as HealthPlan
    - Location: Select an Azure region close to you
    - Pricing tier: Click on this, and select the F1 Free tier
6. Click OK to save the App Service Plan.

7. Click Create to save and create the Web App.

8. After a short time (perhaps 1-2 mins) you should see notification that the Web App has been successfully created. You may want to pin the web app to your Azure dashboard for easy location later on:
<img src="images/WA-5.png" width="624"/>

9. Confirm that your Web App is created by selecting Go to resource.

10. Click on the URL:
<img src="images/WA-6.png" width="624"/>

11. Your Web App should open in the browser and you will see something like this:
<img src="images/WA-7.png" width="624"/>

The exact page details will change over time but this now confirms that you have created a Web App in Azure. In the next lab we will deploy the web application into the newly created Web App.

>Optional: Add an Embedded Webpage widget to the Lab Progress dashboard by:
>- Searching for and adding the Embedded Webpage widget:
><img src="images/WA-8.png" width="624"/>

>- Add the URL for your web app created in the preceding steps:
><img src="images/WA-9.png" width="624"/>

>- Save the changes, close the widget gallery and save the dashboard by clicking on the blue edit button in the bottom right hand corner.

# Lab 4: Continuous Deployment

Continuous Deployment is another key practice within DevOps to enable to continuous delivery of value (in this example the web application) to end users.

1. Complete the following [Continuous Deployment Lab](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/continuousdeployment/) exercises:

- [Exercise 1 (all)](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/continuousdeployment/#exercise-1-connect-to-microsoft-azure)

- [Exercise 2 (all)](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/continuousdeployment/#exercise-2-creating-release-definitions)

>Note: There is no need to complete Exercise 2 Steps 9 and 10 (replace the database connection string and ConnectionStrings variable plus Azure SQL database creation). The web application can create a local database.

- [Exercise 3, Task 1 only](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/continuousdeployment/#task-1-triggers)

2. Confirm that the continuous deployment pipeline is working:

- Make a code change in Visual Studio (such as adding a comment or a minor UI change),  committing and pushing the change.

- Check the Continuous Integration build gets triggered.

- Once complete the Continuous Deployment should be triggered to deploy the changes into Azure.

>Optional: Add a Release Definition Overview widget to the Lab Progress dashboard by:
>- Searching for and adding the Release Definition Overview widget:
><img src="images/CD-1.png" width="300"/>

>- Set the Release Definition to the release created in the lab above:
><img src="images/CD-2.png" width="624"/>

>- Save the changes, close the widget gallery and save the dashboard by clicking on the blue edit button in the bottom right hand corner.

# Lab 5: Infrastructure as Code

The ability to treat infrastructure (machines, networks, configuration) in the same way as code brings many benefits, but in particluar allows you to create infrastructure on demand and include that in your DevOps pipeline. 

Azure Resource Manager (ARM) templates are the native approach and this lab adds using ARM into the flow.

# Lab 6: Automated Testing with Selenium

Integrating automated tests into your DevOps pipeline can help drive quality whilst deploying more frequently. This lab integrates [Selenium](http://www.seleniumhq.org/), a popular testing framework, into your pipeline.

1. Complete the [Automated Testing with Selenium](http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/selenium/) Lab

# Lab 7: Monitoring with Application Insights

DevOps doesn't stop at deployment into production. Monitoring and understanding your application provides valuble insight. 

1. Complete the [Monitoring with Application Insights] Lab(http://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/monitor/)

# Other labs 

If you'd like to continue exploring DevOps with VSTS then related labs include:

[Node.js and Express continuous deployment with Visual Studio Team Services and Azure App Service](https://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/vsts/nodejs/express/)

[DevOps with Visual Studio Team Services for Java](https://almvm.azurewebsites.net/labs/java/)
